{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Calibri;}{\f1 Consolas;}}
\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1080\margb1080
\fs24
\b EscrowIQ Developer Implementation Brief\par
\b0
\par
\b Purpose of This Document\b0\par
This document is a detailed developer handoff based on the current proposal alignment review. It is intended to help the engineering team understand exactly what is already implemented, what is partially implemented, what is missing, and what should be prioritized next for scalability and production readiness.\par
\par
This brief also includes a detailed model-backed AI implementation strategy, designed for the current Flask-based architecture.\par
\par
\b 1) Project Context and Current Architecture\b0\par
\b Product intent:\b0 AI-powered freelance escrow marketplace with trust, fraud prevention, smart matching, and proposal generation.\par
\b Current stack:\b0 Flask backend, SQLite database, server-rendered Jinja templates, client-side JavaScript.\par
\b Current architecture pattern:\b0 Single-file backend monolith (`app.py`) with routes, data access, business rules, and AI logic mixed together.\par
\par
\b Key backend source:\b0 `Backend/app.py`, `Backend/run.py`\par
\b Key frontend source:\b0 templates in `Frontend/templates/` (base, dashboards, jobs, job detail, profile, auth pages).\par
\par
\b 2) Proposal Alignment Summary\b0\par
\b Overall alignment status:\b0 Partially aligned.\par
\par
\b Aligned areas (strong implementation):\b0\par
- User management: register/login/logout, role-based access.\par
- Core marketplace flow: job posting, browsing, proposal submission, proposal acceptance/rejection.\par
- Escrow simulation: deposit, release, refund, balance updates.\par
- AI-inspired features: rule-based fraud detection, heuristic smart matching, template-driven proposal generation.\par
- Role-based UX: separate client and freelancer workflow pages.\par
\par
\b Partially aligned areas:\b0\par
- Scalability readiness: architecture works for demo and course scope, but requires modularization and infrastructure improvements before scale.\par
- Operational resilience: no formal migration system, weak production hardening, and no test suite.\par
\par
\b Not yet aligned areas (for production expectations):\b0\par
- Automated test coverage for critical trust/payment paths.\par
- Observability and reliability systems.\par
- Full contract consistency between backend responses and frontend expectations.\par
\par
\b Note on backend framework:\b0 Flask is now treated as an intentional architecture choice (not a mismatch).\par
\par
\b 3) Detailed Findings by Layer\b0\par
\b 3.1 Backend Findings\b0\par
\b What is good today:\b0\par
1. Core data model includes users, jobs, proposals, escrow, notifications.\par
2. Authorization checks are present in critical routes.\par
3. Escrow lifecycle is implemented and integrated with balances.\par
4. AI features are integrated into real user flows.\par
\par
\b High-priority backend risks:\b0\par
1. \b Monolithic file design\b0\par
   All domains are tightly coupled in one code file, increasing regression risk and reducing maintainability.\par
\par
2. \b Financial operation consistency\b0\par
   Multi-step escrow and state transitions are composed of separate writes. Under concurrency, this can lead to inconsistent state if one write succeeds and another fails.\par
\par
3. \b Security hardening gaps\b0\par
   Current approach uses session auth but lacks robust production controls (for example stricter secret handling and CSRF protections for state changes).\par
\par
4. \b No test safety net\b0\par
   Critical user trust features (payments, status transitions, proposal acceptance logic) are not protected by automated tests.\par
\par
\b 3.2 Frontend Findings\b0\par
\b What is good today:\b0\par
1. Clear role-based UX for client and freelancer flows.\par
2. Feature discoverability is strong through dashboards and job detail actions.\par
3. Trust indicators are visible (risk levels, escrow state, status badges).\par
\par
\b Frontend contract and reliability issues:\b0\par
1. Template-data mismatches on some pages (field assumptions differ from backend payload).\par
2. Notification badge behavior depends on unread values not consistently provided.\par
3. Some UI claims are stronger than current implementation behavior (for example fully real-time notification expectations).\par
\par
\b 3.3 Data and Platform Findings\b0\par
1. SQLite is acceptable for local or academic use, but not ideal for high-concurrency production workloads.\par
2. No CI/CD, no deployment blueprint, and no monitoring stack.\par
3. No clear environment-specific config structure beyond basic runtime variables.\par
\par
\b 4) Priority Roadmap for Engineering Execution\b0\par
\b P0: Stabilization and Correctness (Immediate)\b0\par
Goal: Eliminate correctness and integration issues before refactor or scaling.\par
\par
Actions:\par
1. Fix all frontend/backend payload contract mismatches.\par
2. Normalize route response schemas (including unread notification counts and expected profile/job fields).\par
3. Add server-side validation parity with UI constraints.\par
4. Harden session security configuration and anti-forgery protections.\par
5. Add smoke/integration tests for:\par
   - auth flow,\par
   - job posting,\par
   - proposal lifecycle,\par
   - escrow deposit/release/refund,\par
   - notification retrieval and mark-read.\par
\par
\b P1: Structural Refactor (Short-to-Mid Term)\b0\par
Goal: Make codebase maintainable for multi-developer work and future features.\par
\par
Actions:\par
1. Split domains into modules/blueprints:\par
   `auth`, `jobs`, `proposals`, `escrow`, `ai`, `notifications`.\par
2. Introduce service layer and repository/data-access separation.\par
3. Externalize inline frontend scripts/styles progressively into static assets.\par
4. Add dependency manifest and repeatable environment setup.\par
5. Add API contract tests to prevent UI/API drift.\par
\par
\b P2: Scale-Ready Engineering (Mid-to-Long Term)\b0\par
Goal: Prepare for production-scale reliability and throughput.\par
\par
Actions:\par
1. Migrate database from SQLite to PostgreSQL.\par
2. Add asynchronous worker pipeline for heavy/background tasks.\par
3. Introduce real-time channel (WebSocket or SSE) where claims require live updates.\par
4. Add rate limits, API versioning, robust logging, metrics, and alerting.\par
5. Expand business capabilities: milestone escrow, disputes, audit trail.\par
\par
\b 5) Model-Backed AI Implementation (Detailed)\b0\par
\b Objective:\b0 Upgrade current rule/template AI into a robust model-backed AI layer without breaking current product flow.\par
\par
\b 5.1 Guiding Principles\b0\par
1. Keep current heuristics as fallback until model quality is proven.\par
2. Decouple AI calls from route handlers using service abstractions.\par
3. Log all inference operations for quality measurement and rollback.\par
4. Roll out safely using staged activation (shadow, hybrid, primary).\par
\par
\b 5.2 AI Architecture Pattern (Flask-Compatible)\b0\par
Create AI service modules:\par
- `services/ai/provider.py`\par
- `services/ai/fraud_service.py`\par
- `services/ai/matching_service.py`\par
- `services/ai/proposal_service.py`\par
\par
Provider responsibilities:\par
1. Model invocation.\par
2. Timeout and retry policy.\par
3. Fallback orchestration.\par
4. Standardized output contract.\par
\par
\b Standard result contract (recommended):\b0\par
{\f1
{\par
\{\par
  "source": "rule_based|model|hybrid",\par
  "version": "v1",\par
  "score": 0.0,\par
  "label": "Low|Medium|High",\par
  "reasons": [],\par
  "latency_ms": 0\par
\}\par
}
\f0
\par
\b 5.3 Feature-by-Feature Migration Plan\b0\par
\b A) Fraud Detection (Hybrid First)\b0\par
Current: regex rule engine.\par
Upgrade path:\par
1. Add model risk classifier score (0.0-1.0).\par
2. Normalize existing rule score to 0.0-1.0.\par
3. Blend scores (example):\par
   `final = 0.4 * rule_norm + 0.6 * model_score`\par
4. Map final score to risk tiers.\par
5. Persist both component scores and final score for explainability.\par
\par
\b B) Smart Matching (Semantic Ranking)\b0\par
Current: skill overlap + synonyms + ratings/reviews weighting.\par
Upgrade path:\par
1. Generate embeddings for job requirements and freelancer profiles.\par
2. Compute semantic similarity.\par
3. Blend semantic and business signals:\par
   `rank = 0.55*semantic + 0.25*skill_overlap + 0.15*rating + 0.05*experience`\par
4. Cache/precompute freelancer embeddings on profile updates.\par
5. Store top match rationale fields for UI transparency.\par
\par
\b C) Proposal Generation (LLM Guardrailed)\b0\par
Current: template text generator.\par
Upgrade path:\par
1. Build strict prompt template with structured sections.\par
2. Add output constraints:\par
   - length bounds,\par
   - no misleading guarantees,\par
   - no policy-violating suggestions.\par
3. Validate output before returning to UI.\par
4. Fall back to template engine if model fails or policy checks fail.\par
\par
\b 5.4 Data Schema Enhancements for AI\b0\par
Add storage for traceability and improvement loops:\par
1. `ai_inference_logs`\par
   - feature,\par
   - model/version,\par
   - input hash,\par
   - output score/label,\par
   - latency,\par
   - fallback used,\par
   - timestamp.\par
2. `ai_feedback`\par
   - feature,\par
   - entity reference,\par
   - user feedback type,\par
   - free-text comments,\par
   - timestamp.\par
\par
\b 5.5 API and Runtime Controls\b0\par
Introduce configuration flags:\par
- `AI_MODE=rules|model|hybrid`\par
- `AI_FALLBACK_ENABLED=true`\par
- `AI_TIMEOUT_MS=<value>`\par
- `AI_LOGGING_ENABLED=true`\par
\par
Operational behavior:\par
1. If model response times out, fallback immediately.\par
2. Emit structured logs with correlation IDs.\par
3. Surface deterministic messages to UI (no raw provider errors).\par
\par
\b 5.6 Rollout Strategy for Safety\b0\par
Phase 1: \b Shadow Mode\b0\par
- Model runs in background for comparison only.\par
- Users still receive current rule/template outputs.\par
\par
Phase 2: \b Hybrid Mode\b0\par
- Small traffic percentage receives model-assisted outputs.\par
- Compare acceptance and error rates.\par
\par
Phase 3: \b Primary Mode\b0\par
- Model becomes default.\par
- Rules/templates remain active fallback safety net.\par
\par
\b 5.7 Quality Metrics to Track\b0\par
1. Inference latency (p50/p95/p99).\par
2. Error rate and fallback rate.\par
3. User acceptance/usefulness rates.\par
4. Fraud precision proxy via review outcomes and manual overrides.\par
5. Match quality proxy via proposal success and hire conversion.\par
\par
\b 5.8 Suggested Timeline\b0\par
\b Weeks 1-2:\b0 service abstractions, feature flags, inference logs, fallback wiring.\par
\b Weeks 3-4:\b0 hybrid fraud model integration and explanation outputs.\par
\b Weeks 5-6:\b0 semantic matching integration and precomputed embeddings.\par
\b Weeks 7-8:\b0 LLM proposal generation with validation and safety checks.\par
\b Week 9+:\b0 queue workers, observability, A/B testing, continuous improvements.\par
\par
\b 6) Recommended Developer Execution Checklist\b0\par
1. Stabilize contracts first (no new features before this).\par
2. Add test harness around trust-critical flows.\par
3. Modularize backend before introducing many new moving parts.\par
4. Introduce AI provider abstraction before first model integration.\par
5. Ship model-backed AI via staged rollout, never full traffic on day one.\par
6. Instrument metrics before declaring AI upgrade complete.\par
\par
\b 7) Final Developer Guidance\b0\par
The current system is a strong and functional prototype with correct product direction. The most effective path is:\par
1) stabilize correctness,\par
2) modularize architecture,\par
3) instrument operations,\par
4) introduce model-backed AI incrementally with strict fallback and monitoring.\par
\par
If this sequence is followed, the platform can evolve from an academic-grade implementation into a scalable production-capable system while preserving current functionality and trust flows.\par
}
